Welcome back everyone in this lecture we're going to discuss if elif and L statements let's begin to
learn more about control flow.
We often only want certain code to execute on a particular condition has been met.
For example if my dog is hungry that's some condition then I will feed the dog perform some action or
some line of code.
So to control the flow of logic we're going to be able to some keywords if elif and else control flow
syntax makes use of colons and in the notation otherwise known as whitespace and this indentation system
is crucial to Python and it's what really sets it apart from other programming languages.
So let's go through the examples of what the actual syntax of an IF statement an elephant statement
would look like.
So let's imagine we want to check some condition before executing a block of code.
What we do is we say if and then we have some sort of condition and eventually that's going to be a
boolean value.
So if true if false for example could say if one is less than two or if a user names equal equal to
admin and then we perform or execute some code.
So notice here we have a colon and then some tab indented spaces.
So that's the block code will be executed when we have that condition to be true.
Now we can also have an if else statement.
Basically if some condition is true we execute some code else we execute and do something else.
So let us hear if statements they're going to have some conditional check colon and then some indication
and a block of code else isn't going to have a condition related to it because the else is going to
execute only when everything above it hasn't been true or the condition hasn't been met.
Now if you want to check for multiple conditions then you can say if some condition colon executes some
code Elif basically checking for some other condition do something different and you can stack as many
Ls as you want.
And at the end if none of those conditions are true you can have an else to do something else.
At the very end OK let's explore these concepts in more detail by helping over to the Adam text editor.
OK here I am at the Adam text editor.
I'm going to start with just a simple IF statement.
I will say if one is less than two colon and when to hit enter as long as you've already said this as
the PI file you should see an automatic in the notation.
If not you can always just tab over or have four spaces and then that's the indentation.
So this is how Python is going to differentiate blocks of code from each other it's all based on indentation.
So I say if one is Leston to go ahead and print's Yep.
So that's all I'm going to do.
Just a simple IF statement let's run this code.
And I see.
Yep.
Now let's see what happens when I switch this to some statement that I know isn't true.
So I'll say if one equals equals to print Yes.
And now I don't see anything printed out which makes sense because one is not equal to two.
So a more realistic example of something we would use this for is maybe that user name check again.
So say user name provided was admen and then we'll have some check equal to admen.
And then I can say if the user name is equal to the check then I can Prince access granted.
So this kind of the examples we're going to be doing throughout the course this sort of boolean checks
a member we can always add in logical operators as well.
So I can say if user name is equal to check and let's say one is equal to 1.
So then we should see Access Granted there.
OK that's a simple IF statement.
Let's imagine that we want to have some sort of backup lock up code in case this wasn't true.
Well what it could then add onto is say else colon and then something else I could say print all above
conditions were not true.
So when I run this right now what would I expect to see.
Currently these conditions are true.
So I should still see access granted.
So I hit enter and I see Access Granted but let's simplify this if statement to something that's just
not going to be true.
So say if one is equal to two.
Well that's definitely not true.
So basically this block of code won't be executed then.
So I'll check this condition.
That's not true it's a false.
So it doesn't execute this.
Instead it drops down to else.
And notice how the indentation if and else are lined up exactly.
That's how Python knows that these two are go together for each other.
So when I run this now I should see all above.
Conditions were not true.
So I'm going to say Python my example about pi enter.
Now I see all the above conditions were not true.
So checking for one condition and then saying else execute another.
However we can always add more conditions to check so we can do this just by tacking on an Ellis statement.
And these are going to have other conditions.
So let's do another one like.
One is equal to 1.
So I can print middle condition true save that and when I run this now I get to see middle condition
is true.
Now if this happens to be false as well.
So now I have this one is false.
This one's false than the else.
At the very end is going to be executed and you can stack as many lives as you want.
So if you want another LFA there maybe can check for fours equal to four.
Prince third condition and now we run this I get back third condition.
Something to keep in mind is let's imagine we have two cases that are true.
So notice right now my second case one is equal to one.
So the condition is true and therefore is equal to four.
That's also true.
When I run this.
So make sure you save that.
I only see middle condition is true.
I don't see this third condition.
That's because it's only going to execute the first hit of a true condition.
It's not going to go down and continue for the rest.
So for if statements and if elif statements and if else statements it's only going to execute the first
block of code that's within a true conditional statement.
All right so let's finish this off by kind of showing one last more realistic example.
So it will do the following we'll say user name is equal to admen will say permission is equal.
True and that's actually all we'll do.
And we'll say if the user name is equal to admen and we have permission then Prince full access health.
So Aliff Well we've got to put a condition there will say a user name is equal to Addleman.
However there's no permission.
So say an's permission is false then old prince admin access only no full permission.
And then else we'll say Prince no access OK so here what we're saying is we have a username admen permission
is equal to true.
So take a look at this.
Try to freeze frame it and see which one do you think is going to execute.
Full access admin access only or no access.
OK so if we take a look at this user name is equal to admin.
So this condition is true and permission is true.
So it looks like we should see right away for access.
So when I run this that's what I see.
Full access no change is permission to be false.
So now when I run this well I'm not going to have permission is equal to true anymore.
Instead it's going to be equal to false.
So I should see adamant access only no full permission.
And now let's set permission.
True but let's go ahead and provide a different username.
We provide Jose as a user name and when I run this I get back no access because none of these conditions
or else were met.
OK that's the very basics.
If elephant statements will be using these a lot for control flow if you have any questions feel free
to post the Q&A forums.
We'll see you at the next lecture.
Well we begin to discuss Lupe's.